---
layout: post
title: File I/O
subtitle: with Python!
gh-badge: [star, fork, follow]
tags: [python, coding, learning, file i/o]
comments: true
---

### Working With Files

`open` allows you to open a specific file in Python.

`.seek` = seeks the position within the file indicated by numbers `[0]`
`.read()` = reads the file. Can only read through once.
`.readlines()` = reads only first line of file. But if repeated, can read multiple lines. One after another.
`.close()` = manually closes the file. Will not close the file without using this command.

### Read, Write, Append

                `with open('test.txt') as my_file
                    print(my_file.readlines())`

The above code is a standard way to read a file.

`with open ('test.txt, mode='r')` = Reads file by default if blank, but this syntax also works.

To indicate you want to write to a file, simply change the `r` to `w`. Which also creates a new file, if the one named does not exist.

`r+` enables you to read & write.

`a` for appending the file. Writing at the end.

TO indicate the location of a file in a folder. Simply indicate the directory where the name of the file would go. Like this:

                `with open ('app/test.txt', mode='r')
                    print(my_file.read())`

`\` for windows systems
`/` for UNIX based systems

An `absolute` path is the exact directory you are looking for the file.

A `relative` path is based on where the script will run relative to the present working directory.

`./` will tell the computer to run the script from the current folder.

`../` will try to run from the directory that is one folder above the pwd

### Errors

                `try:
                    with open('test.txt', mode='r') as my_file:
                    print(my_file.read())
                except FileNotFoundError as err:
                    print('file does not exist')
                    raise err`

The syntax above is a common way to catch errors related to the file. `raise err` will bring up the computers error message, and adding the `print` statement will return your own custom message for the program.

You can also write the above code and have it catch an `IOError` which happens when the computer struggles to read the file properly.