---
layout: post
title: Generators
subtitle: with Python!
gh-badge: [star, fork, follow]
tags: [python, coding, learning, modules]
comments: true
---

### What Are Modules?

Each `.py` file is a module within a program.

`import` is how you can input functions into a file.

Say you have a file that defines functions but doesn't call them. You call this file the `utility.py`

To access these functions, you can simply say `import utility` at the very top of your code.

`__pycache__` will generate itself within the program. To cache the access to the data in case there are no changes.

Say you have a folder called `shopping` and in it is a file called `cart.py`. You could call it into your program by going: `import shopping.cart`.

### Packages

Folders within a Python program that have individual `__init__` files. And contain other Python modules

### Different ways of importing

Like before, you can import in ways like `import shopping.cart`. But perhaps you have a lot of layers in your program and only need a specific function.

You can call it by going `from shopping import cart` and you can reference specific functions within the file you are calling. Seperated by commas of course `from math import divide, multiply, add, subtract`

Or you can go `from shopping.cart import new_cust_discount`

There are various ways to access specific functions and methods through modules.

### `__name__`

`if __name__ == __main__:` this is an if statement asking if the `name` dundar is equal to the `main` dundar file. This is apparently a common line to see in Python code.

`__main__` is a determination given to a specific file in the program. Doesn't have to be named `main.py` though it seems traditionally it is.

The above if statement is useful to only run certain code from the main file.

### Some bits to remember

Give a module an alias if you want to avoid collisions `import random as bingo`

You can also single out a specific function within a module if that's all you need `from random import shuffle`
